feat!: add static/dynamic context (#171)
open-feature/spec: specification/sections/03-evaluation-context.md

The key uniquely identifies a field in the `evaluation context` and it should be unique across all types to avoid any collision when marshalling the `evaluation context` by the provider.

### 3.2 Context levels and merging

#### Condition 3.2.1

> The implementation uses the static-context paradigm.

> see: [static-context paradigm](../glossary.md#static-context-paradigm)

Reviewer: Not sure where the correct part in the spec is to ask about this, but what about providing a callback mechanism at the Variable level for variable value updates when the context is changed?

From this [blog post](https://openfeature.dev/blog/catering-to-the-client-side/) it seems like the intention was to use events like this: 
```
client.addHandler(ProviderEvents.FlagValuesChanged, () => {
  // this would trigger a re-render
  setUseFormalSalutation(client.getBooleanValue('use-formal-salutation', false));
});
```

I would recommend that a flag / variable level callback handler would be more useful for users and make integrations into React Hooks and other similar implementations easier.

```typescript
openFeatureClient.getBooleanValue('boolean-flag', false)
    .onUpdate((value: boolean, details: EvaluationDetails<boolean>) => {

    })
```

Reviewer: I'm not certain if this is part of the implementation (going to test it out soon), but does the OpenFeature SDK have a mechanism of being told when the underlying provider has updated its feature cache? if so then this could be handled within the OpenFeature SDKs. But you are likely correct that this is likely too specific of an implementation detail for this spec right now. However, as we get into implementing more reactive / hook-based client-side SDKs this almost becomes necessary to propagate flag updates.

Author: @jonathannorris have you had a chance to confirm if `PROVIDER_CONFIGURATION_CHANGED` covers the case you mentioned?

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.1.1

> The API **MUST** have a method for supplying `evaluation context`.

> API (global) `evaluation context` can be used to supply data to flag evaluation, such as user name, email, or shopping cart items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
API (global) `evaluation context` can be used to supply data to flag evaluation, such as (but not limited to) user name, email, or shopping cart items.
```

Author: added

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.1.2

> The Client and invocation **MUST NOT** have a method for supplying `evaluation context`.

> In the single-context paradigm, context is global. The client and invocation cannot supply evaluation context. 

Reviewer 3: I'm struggling with this quite a bit. 

On the one hand, I'm concerned that making evaluation context global is going to cause serious issue for sophisticated consumers who target flag evaluation across multiple dimensions. For example, the Spotify use case where some flags vary by artists, and the "current artist" is going to change frequently. If we only have 1 single shared context then every time ANY evaluation context changes then ALL feature flags would need to be re-evaluated. If we had some sort of nesting/merging capability then we could probably avoid this "cache busting" problem.

However, on the other hand, I suspect that some provider's client-side SDKs assume that evaluation context is shared global state, and if we allowed nested state that could make implementing the OF provider API harder.

Author: > On the one hand, I'm concerned that making evaluation context global is going to cause serious issue for sophisticated consumers who target flag evaluation across multiple dimensions. For example, the Spotify use case where some flags vary by artists, and the "current artist" is going to change frequently. If we only have 1 single shared context then every time ANY evaluation context changes then ALL feature flags would need to be re-evaluated. If we had some sort of nesting/merging capability then we could probably avoid this "cache busting" problem.

Especially with the ability to dif the old/new context, could this be something the provider handles? For example, my context could be a complex object with multiple top level objects, and I could check them for changes in `onContextSet` and only re-evaluate what's needed, assuming my provider is intelligent enough for that.

> In the static-context paradigm, context is global. The client and invocation cannot supply evaluation context. 

Reviewer 4: Interesting. What's the benefit of enforcing that the invocation cannot supply a context? I'm struggling to see the use-case where this is beneficial to the user.

I can understand that you could get the state where two contexts contain different values for the same key in the context, but in my mind it's trivial to say that the invocation-context overrides the global-context for situations where we have a key-clash.

Given that CloudBees Feature Management allows setting a global context and invocation context, it basically means that CBFM will always operate in the evaluation context paradigm. I'm not sure if I'm understanding this correctly though, or if this is an issue.

Author: As you note, some providers (Cloudbees being one of them) do local evaluation in client apps, and therefore can do "dynamic" evaluation (involving an invocation context) without issue. This isn't the case with other vendors. Those SDKs basically have a "bulk evaluate + cache + return-from-cache" paradigm, where a change in context triggers another bulk evaluation (rules are never sent to the client).

Allowing dynamic context in this case is basically a no-go, it's a huge performance footgun. While it's possible for Cloudbees to fit into the static-context paradigm, it's not possible for the bulk-evaluated SDKs to fit into a dynamic context paradigm. We're trying to walk a fine-line here to find an abstraction that works across as many paradigms as possible.

@moredip  did a really good job explaining this in his recent blog post: https://docs.openfeature.dev/blog/catering-to-the-client-side

I'm definitely interested in getting more thoughts from you on this, since Cloudbees is one of the two vendors I'm aware of whose client SDKs works by shipping a ruleset.

Author: This [OFEP](https://github.com/open-feature/ofep/pull/41) is also highly relevant.

### 3.2 Context levels and merging

#### Condition 3.2.1

> The implementation uses the dynamic-context paradigm.

see: [dynamic-context paradigm](../glossary.md#dynamic-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.1.1

> The API, Client and invocation **MUST** have a method for supplying `evaluation context`.

API (global) `evaluation context` can be used to supply static data to flag evaluation, such as an application identifier, compute region, or hostname. Client and invocation `evaluation context` are ideal for dynamic data, such as end-user attributes.

#### Condition 3.2.2

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

> The implementation uses the static-context paradigm.

see: [static-context paradigm](../glossary.md#static-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.2.1

> > The API **MUST** have a method for supplying `evaluation context`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> The API **MUST** have a method for setting the global `evaluation context`.
```

I think this will be a setter in API level 🤔

> API (global) `evaluation context` can be used to supply data to flag evaluation, such as (but not limited to) user name, email, or shopping cart items.

Author: I agree. I like "organization membership".

> API (global) `evaluation context` can be used to supply data to flag evaluation, such as (but not limited to) user name, email, or shopping cart items.

Author: updated

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.2.2

> The Client and invocation **MUST NOT** have a method for supplying `evaluation context`.

In the static-context paradigm, context is global. The client and invocation cannot supply evaluation context. 

> 

Reviewer 6: Initially I was just wondering why, and after looking closer I found this conflict.
As I said, not allowing it seems like a tradeoff and I was just wondering if this is the reason.
So yes we can resolve this one 🙂

One thing that came to my mind: do we have any place where we document such explicit decisions. I could imagine questions like this or ones where the reason for the decision is not even so obvious are documented. To me the spec describes the "what" but it does not always answer the "why". 
Maybe we would benefit of a documentation format in similar to [ADRs](https://www.cognitect.com/blog/2011/11/15/documenting-architecture-decisions).

> 

Reviewer 6: Mhh, my feeling is that they are kind of different.
What I mean are not proposals, but rather decisions that have been made in the context of some constrains, to make it easy to reference it and say "this is why we decided".
OFEPs to me are really valuable, but I feel like these decision records that I mean are just used with a bit different motivation 🤔 But I see the large overlap, also when looking at the current OFEPs

> 

Reviewer 6: I mean this is the wrong thread for it.
Maybe I can think a bit more about this and I can bring it back up somewhere else so we can resolve this thread.
